troubleshooting: add TiDB OOM troubleshooting tips (#10724)
pingcap/docs: troubleshoot-tidb-oom.md

---
title: Troubleshoot OOM Issues
summary: Learn how to diagnose and resolve TiDB Out Of Memory (OOM) issues.
---

# Troubleshoot OOM Issues

> This document describes how to troubleshoot TiDB Out Of Memory (OOM) problems, including phenomenon, causes, and solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to troubleshoot TiDB Out Of Memory (OOM) problems, including phenomena, causes, and solutions.
```

---
title: Troubleshoot TiDB OOM Issues

> summary: Learn how to diagnose and resolve TiDB Out of Memory (OOM) issues.

Author: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to diagnose and resolve TiDB OOM (Out of Memory) issues.
```

---

# Troubleshoot TiDB OOM Issues

> This document describes how to troubleshoot TiDB Out of Memory (OOM), including phenomena, causes, solutions, and diagnostic information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to troubleshoot TiDB OOM (Out of Memory) issues, including phenomena, causes, solutions, and diagnostic information.
```

## Typical OOM phenomena

> The following lists some typical OOM phenomena:

Author: ```suggestion
The following are some typical OOM phenomena:
```

> Typical OOM phenomena include (but are not limited to) the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following lists some typical OOM phenomena:
```

> - The client side reports the following error: `SQL error, errno = 2013, state = 'HY000': Lost connection to MySQL server during query`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The client side reports a `SQL error, errno = 2013, state = 'HY000': Lost connection to MySQL server during query` error.
```

- Check Grafana, and you can find the following problems:

>     - **TiDB** > **Server** > **Memory Usage** shows that process/heapInUse keeps rising, and suddenly drops to zero after reaching the threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **TiDB** > **Server** > **Memory Usage** shows that the `process/heapInUse` metric keeps rising, and suddenly drops to zero after reaching the threshold.
```

    - **TiDB** > **Server** > **Uptime** suddenly drops to zero.

>     - **TiDB-Runtime** > **Memory Usage** shows that `estimate-inuse` keeps rising.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **TiDB-Runtime** > **Memory Usage** shows that the `estimate-inuse` metric keeps rising.
```

- Check `tidb.log`, and you can find the following log entries:
    - An alarm about OOM: `[WARN] [memory_usage_alarm.go:139] ["tidb-server has the risk of OOM. Running SQLs and heap profile will be recorded in record path"]`. For more information, see [`memory-usage-alarm-ratio`](/system-variables.md#tidb_memory_usage_alarm_ratio).

>     - A log entry about restart: `[INFO] [printer.go:33] ["Welcome to TiDB."]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - A log entry about restart: `[INFO] [printer.go:33] ["Welcome to TiDB."]`.
```

## Overall troubleshooting process

When you troubleshoot OOM issues, follow this process:

> 1. First, confirm whether it is an OOM issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Confirm whether it is an OOM issue.
```

>     Execute the following command to check the operating system logs. If there is a `oom-killer` log near the time when the problem occurs, you can confirm that it is an OOM issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Execute the following command to check the operating system logs. If there is an `oom-killer` log near the time when the problem occurs, you can confirm that it is an OOM issue.
```

>     Execute the following command to check the operating system logs. If the result has the `oom-killer` logs near the time point when the problem occurs, then you can confirm that an OOM problem has occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Execute the following command to check the operating system logs. If there is a `oom-killer` log near the time when the problem occurs, you can confirm that it is an OOM issue.
```

    ```shell
    dmesg -T | grep tidb-server
    ```

    The following is an example of the log that contains `oom-killer`:

    ```shell
    ......
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: tidb-server invoked oom-killer: gfp_mask=0x201da, order=0, oom_score_adj=0
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: tidb-server cpuset=/ mems_allowed=0
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: CPU: 14 PID: 21966 Comm: tidb-server Kdump: loaded Not tainted 3.10.0-1160.el7.x86_64 #1
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: Hardware name: QEMU Standard PC (i440FX + PIIX, 1996), BIOS rel-1.14.0-0-g155821a1990b-prebuilt.qemu.org 04/01/2014
    ......
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: Out of memory: Kill process 21945 (tidb-server) score 956 or sacrifice child
    Mar 14 16:55:03 localhost kernel: Killed process 21945 (tidb-server), UID 1000, total-vm:33027492kB, anon-rss:31303276kB, file-rss:0kB, shmem-rss:0kB
    Mar 14 16:55:07 localhost systemd: tidb-4000.service: main process exited, code=killed, status=9/KILL
    ......
    ```

> 2. After confirming that it is an OOM issue, you can further investigate whether the OOM is caused by deployment or database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. After confirming that it is an OOM issue, you can further investigate whether the OOM is caused by deployment or the database.
```

> 2. After confirming that it is an OOM issue, you can further investigate whether OOM is caused by a deployment issue or a database issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. After confirming that it is an OOM issue, you can further investigate whether the OOM is caused by deployment or database.
```

>     - If OOM is caused by a deployment issue, you need to investigate the resource configuration and impact of hybrid deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If the OOM is caused by a deployment issue, you need to investigate the resource configuration and impact of hybrid deployment.
```

>     - If OOM is caused by a database issue, the following are some possible causes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If the OOM is caused by a database issue, the following are some possible causes:
```

        - TiDB handles large data traffic, such as large queries, large writes, and data import.
        - TiDB is in a high concurrency scenario, where multiple SQL concurrency consumes resources or operator concurrency is high.

>         - TiDB has a memory leak and resources are not freed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - TiDB has a memory leak and resources are not released.
```

    Refer to the following sections for specific troubleshooting methods.

## Typical causes and solutions

> Depending on the reasons for OOM issues, it can be divided into the following scenarios.

Author: causes of OOM issues

- [Deployment issues](#deployment-issues)
- [Database issues](#database-issues)
- [Client side issues](#client-side-issues)

### Deployment issues

> The following are common causes of OOM caused by deployment issues:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following are common causes of OOM due to improper deployment:
```

- The TiUP configuration [`resource_control`](/tiup/tiup-cluster-topology-reference.md#global) is not appropriate.
- In the case of hybrid deployments (meaning that TiDB and other applications are deployed on the same server), TiDB is killed accidentally by `oom-killer` due to lack of resources.

### Database issues

This section describes the causes and solutions for OOM caused by database issues.

> **Note:**
>
> If you have configured [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query), an error occurs: `ERROR 1105 (HY000): Out Of Memory Quota![conn_id=54]`. It is caused by the memory usage control behavior of the database. You can safely ignore it.

#### Executing SQL statements consumes too much memory

You can take the following measures to reduce the memory usage of SQL statements, depending on the different causes of OOM issues.

- If the execution plan of SQL is not optimal, for example, due to lack of proper indexes, outdated statistics, or optimizer bugs, a wrong execution plan of SQL might be selected. A huge intermediate result set will then be accumulated in the memory. In this case, consider the following measures.

>     - Add appropriate indexes
>     - Use the [disk spill](/configure-memory-usage.md#disk-spill) feature for execution operators
>     - Adjust the JOIN order between tables
>     - Use hints to optimize SQL statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Add appropriate indexes.
    - Use the [disk spill](/configure-memory-usage.md#disk-spill) feature for execution operators.
    - Adjust the JOIN order between tables.
    - Use hints to optimize SQL statements.
```

> - Some operators and functions do not support pushing down to the storage level, resulting in a huge accumulation of intermediate result sets. In this case, you need to refine the business SQL statements or use hints to optimize, and use the functions or operators that support pushing down.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Some operators and functions are not supported to be pushed down to the storage level, resulting in a huge accumulation of intermediate result sets. In this case, you need to refine the SQL statements or use hints to optimize, and use the functions or operators that support pushing down.
```

> - Some operators and functions do not support pushing down to the storage level, resulting in a huge accumulation of intermediate result sets. In this case, you need to refine the business SQL statements or use hints to tune, and use the functions or operators that support pushing down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some operators and functions do not support pushing down to the storage level, resulting in a huge accumulation of intermediate result sets. In this case, you need to refine the business SQL statements or use hints to optimize, and use the functions or operators that support pushing down.
```

- The execution plan contains the operator HashAgg. HashAgg is executed concurrently by multiple threads, which is faster but consumes more memory. Instead, you can use `STREAM_AGG()`.

> - Reduce the number of regions to be read simultaneously or reduce the concurrency of operators to avoid memory problems caused by high concurrency. The corresponding system variables include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reduce the number of Regions to be read simultaneously or reduce the concurrency of operators to avoid memory problems caused by high concurrency. The corresponding system variables include:
```

    - [`tidb_distsql_scan_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_distsql_scan_concurrency)
    - [`tidb_index_serial_scan_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_serial_scan_concurrency)

>     - [`tidb_executor_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_executor_concurrency-span-classversion-marknew-in-v50span)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`tidb_executor_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_executor_concurrency-new-in-v50)
```

- The concurrency of sessions is too high near the time point when the problem occurs. In this case, consider scaling out the TiDB cluster by adding more TiDB nodes.

#### Large transactions or large writes consume too much memory

> You need to plan for memory capacity. When processing a transaction, TiDB can consume memory up to two to three times the size of the transaction.

Author: ```suggestion
You need to plan for memory capacity. When a transaction is executed, the memory usage of the TiDB process is scaled up comparing with the transaction size, up to two to three times or more of the transaction size.
```

> You need to plan for memory capacity. When processing a transaction, TiDB can consume memory up to two to three times the size of the transaction.

Reviewer 2: Use " When a transaction is executed, the memory usage of the TiDB process is scaled up comparing with the transaction size, up to two to three times or more of the transaction size."? See https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/transaction-overview#transaction-size-limit

> You need to plan for memory capacity. TiDB can consume up to two to three times more memory than the size of a committed transaction when processing a transaction.

Reviewer 2: "two to three times more memory than" 是比以前多 2 到 3 倍？

> You need to plan for memory capacity. TiDB can consume up to two to three times more memory than the size of a committed transaction when processing a transaction.

Author: ```suggestion
You need to plan for memory capacity. TiDB can consume up to two to three times memory the size of a committed transaction when processing a transaction.
```

> You need to plan in advance for memory capacity. TiDB can consume up to two to three times more memory than the size of a committed transaction when processing a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to plan for memory capacity. TiDB can consume up to two to three times more memory than the size of a committed transaction when processing a transaction.
```
plan == decide on and make arrangements for in advance

> You can split a single large transaction to make it smaller in size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can split a single large transaction to multiple smaller transactions.
```

#### The process of collecting and loading statistical information consumes too much memory

A TiDB node needs to load statistics into memory after it starts. TiDB consumes memory when collecting statistical information. You can control memory usage by the following ways:

> - Specify a sampling rate, only collect statistics for specific columns, and reduce analyze concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify a sampling rate, only collect statistics for specific columns, and reduce `ANALYZE`concurrency.
```

> - Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb-stats-cache-mem-quota-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the memory usage for statistical information.

Author: ```suggestion
- Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/system-variables.md#tidb-stats-cache-mem-quota-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the memory usage for statistical information.
```

> - Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/system-variables.md#tidb-stats-cache-mem-quota-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the memory usage for statistical information.

Author: ```suggestion
- Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota-new-in-v610) to control the memory usage for statistical information.
```

> - Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`enable_tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-stats-cache-mem-quota-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the memory usage for statistical information.

Author: ```suggestion
- Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb-stats-cache-mem-quota-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the memory usage for statistical information.
```

> - Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_mem_quota_analyze`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_analyze-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the maximum memory usage when TiDB updates statistics.

Author: ```suggestion
- Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_mem_quota_analyze`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_analyze-new-in-v610) to control the maximum memory usage when TiDB updates statistics.
```

> - Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_mem_quota_analyze`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_analyze-span-classversion-marknew-in-v610span) to control the maximum memory usage when TiDB updates statistics.

Author: ```suggestion
- Since TiDB v6.1.0, you can use the system variable [`tidb_mem_quota_analyze`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stats_cache_mem_quota-new-in-v610) to control the maximum memory usage when TiDB updates statistics.
```

For more information, see [Introduction to Statistics](/statistics.md).

#### Prepared statements are overused

> The client side keeps creating prepared statements but does not execute [`deallocate prepare stmt`](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#ignore-the-com_stmt_close-command-and-the-deallocate-prepare-statement), which causes memory consumption to continue to rise and eventually triggers TiDB OOM. The reason is that the memory occupied by a prepared statement is not released until the session is closed. This is especially important in the case of long connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client side keeps creating prepared statements but does not execute [`deallocate prepare stmt`](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#ignore-the-com_stmt_close-command-and-the-deallocate-prepare-statement), which causes memory consumption to continue to rise and eventually triggers TiDB OOM. The reason is that the memory occupied by a prepared statement is not released until the session is closed. This is especially important under long connections.
```

#### `tidb_enable_rate_limit_action` is not configured properly

The system variable [`tidb_enable_rate_limit_action`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_rate_limit_action) controls memory usage effectively when an SQL statement only reads data. If computing operations (such as join or aggregation operations) are required, memory usage might not be under the control of [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query), which increases the risk of OOM.

It is recommended that you disable this system variable. Since TiDB v6.3.0, this system variable is disabled by default.

### Client side issues

If OOM occurs on the client side, investigate the following:

- Check the trend and speed on **Grafana TiDB Details** > **Server** > **Client Data Traffic** to see if there is a network blockage.
- Check whether there is an application OOM caused by wrong JDBC configuration parameters. For example, if the parameter related to streaming read `defaultFetchSize` is incorrectly configured, it can cause data to be heavily accumulated on the client side.

## Diagnostic information to be collected to address OOM issues

> To locate an OOM failure, you need to collect the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To locate an OOM issue, you need to collect the following information:
```

- Collect the memory-related configuration of the operating system
    - TiUP configuration: `resource_control.memory_limit`
    - Operating system configuration:
        - Memory information: `cat /proc/meminfo`
        - Kernel parameters: `vm.overcommit_memory`
    - NUMA information:
        - `numactl --hardware`
        - `numactl --show`

> - Collect the version information and the memory-related configuration of the database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Collect the version information and the memory-related configurations of the database:
```

    - TiDB version
    - `tidb_mem_quota_query`
    - `memory-usage-alarm-ratio`
    - `mem-quota-query`
    - `oom-action`
    - `tidb_enable_rate_limit_action`
    - `server-memory-quota`
    - `oom-use-tmp-storage`
    - `tmp-storage-path`
    - `tmp-storage-quota`
    - `tidb_analyze_version`

- Check the daily usage of TiDB memory on Grafana: **TiDB** > **Server** > **Memory Usage**

- Check the SQL statements that consume more memory.

>     - View SQL statement analysis, slow queries and memory usage from TiDB Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - View SQL statement analysis, slow queries, and memory usage in TiDB Dashboard.
```

    - Check `SLOW_QUERY` and `CLUSTER_SLOW_QUERY` in `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`.
    - Check `tidb_slow_query.log` on each TiDB node.
    - Run `grep "expensive_query" tidb.log` to check the corresponding log entries.

>     - Run `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` to check memory usage of operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Run `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` to check the memory usage of operators.
```

    - Run `SELECT * FROM information_schema.processlist;` to check the value of the `MEM` column.

- Run the following command to collect the TiDB Profile information when memory usage is high:

    ```shell
    curl -G http://{TiDBIP}:10080/debug/zip?seconds=10" > profile.zip
    ```

> - Run `grep "tidb-server has the risk of OOM" tidb.log` to check the path of the alert file collected by TiDB Server. The following is an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run `grep "tidb-server has the risk of OOM" tidb.log` to check the path of the alert file collected by TiDB Server. The following is an example output:
```
